Internet Protocol version 6 Addressing Architecture
===================================================

## 1. Introduction

This specification defines the addressing architecture of the Internet Protocol version 6 protocol. It includes the basic formats for the various types of Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses (unicast, anycast, and multicast).

## 2. Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> Addressing

Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses are 1280bit identifiers for interfaces and sets of interfaces (where "interface" is as defined in Section 2 of [Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup>](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8200)). There are three types of addresses:

- Unicast

  An identifier for a single interface. A packet sent to a unicast address is delivered to the interface identified by that address.

- Anycast

  An identifier for a set of interfaces (typically belonging to different nodes). A packet sent to an anycast address is delivered to one of the interfaces identifies by that address (the "nearest" one, according to the routing protocol's measure of distance).

- Multicast

  An identifier for a set of interfaces (typically belonging to different nodes). A packet sent to a multicast address is delivered to all interfaces identified by that address.

There are no broadcast addresses in Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup>, their function being superseded by multicast addresses.

In this document, fields in addresses are given a specific name, for example "subnet". When this name is used with the term "id" for identifier after the name (e.g., "subnet id"), it refers to the contents of the named field. When it is used with the term "prefix" (e.g., "subnet prefix"), it refers to all of the address from the left up and including this field.

In Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup>, all zeros and all ones are legal values for any field, unless specifically excluded. Specifically, prefixes may contain, or end with, zero-valued fields.

### 2.1. Addressing Model

Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses of all types are assigned to interfaces, not nodes. An Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> unicast address refers to a single interface. Since each address (see Section 2.8 for additional required addresses). A single interface may also have multiple Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses of any type (unicast, anycast, and mutlicast) or scope. Unicast addresses with a scope greater than link-scope are not needed for interfaces that are not used as the origin or destination of any Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> packets to or from interfaces. There is one exception to this addressing model:

  A unicast address or a set of unicast addresses may be assigned to multiple physical interfaces if the implemetnation treats the multiple physical interfaces as one interface when presenting it to the internet layer. This is useful for load-sharing over multiple physical interfaces.

Currently, Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> continues the Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> model in that a subnet prefix is associated with one link. Multiple subnet prefixes may be assigned to the same link.

### 2.2. Text Representation of Addresses

There are three conventional forms of representing Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses as text strings:

1. The preferred form is x:x:x:x:x:x:x:x, where the 'x' are one to four hexadecimal digits of the eight 16 bit pieces of the address. Examples:

        ABCD:EF01:2345:6789:ABCD:EF01:2345:6789

        2001:DB8:0:0:8:800:200C:417A

   Note that it is not necessary to write the leading zeros in an individual field, but there must be at least one numeral in every field (except for the case decribed in 2.).

2. Due to some methods of allocating certain styles of Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> addresses, it will be common for addresses to contain long strings of zero bits. In order to make writing addresses containing zero bits easier, a special syntax is available to compress the zeros. The use of "::" indicates one or more groups of 16 bits of zeros. The "::" can only appear once in address. The "::" can also be used to compress leading or trailing zeros in an address.

   For example, the following addresses

        2001:DB8:0:0:8:800:200C:417A   a unicast address
        FF01:0:0:0:0:0:0:101           a multicast address
        0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1                the loopback address
        0:0:0:0:0:0:0:0                the unspecified address

   may be represented as

        2001:DB8::8:800:200C:417A      a unicast address
        FF01::101                      a multicast address
        ::1                            the loopback address
        ::                             the unspecified address

3. An alternative form that is sometimes more convenient when dealing with a mixed environment of Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> and Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> nodes is x:x:x:x:x:x:d.d.d.d, where the 'x's are the hexadecimal values of the six high-order 16-bit pieces of the address, and the 'd's are decimal values of the four low-order 8-bit pieces of the address (standard Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> representation). Examples:

        0:0:0:0:0:0:13.1.68.3

        0:0:0:0:FFFF:129.144.52.38

   or in compressed form:

        ::13.1.68.3

        ::FFFF:129.144.52.38

### 2.3. Text Representation of Address Prefixes

The text representation of Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> address prefixes is similar to the way Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> address prefixes are written in Classless Inter-Domain Routing <sup>CIDR</sup> [Classless Inter-domain Routing <sup>CIDR</sup>: The Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation Plan](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4632) notation. An Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> address prefix is represented by the notation:

    internet protocol version 6 address / prefix length

where

  internet protocol version 6 address is an Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> address in any of the notations listed in Section 2.2.

  prefix length is a decimal value specifying how many of the leftmost contiguous bits of the address comprise the prefix.

For example, the following are legal representations of the 60-bit prefix 20010DB80000CD3 (hexadecimal):

    2001:0DB8:0000:CD30:0000:0000:0000:0000/60
    2001:0DB8::CD30:0:0:0:0/60
    2001:0DB8:0:CD30::/60

The following are not legal representations of the above prefix:

  `2001:0DB8:0:CD3/60` may drop leading zeros, but not trailing zeros, within any 16-bit chunk of the address

  `2001:0DB8::CD30/60` address to left of "/" expands to `2001:0DB8:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:CD30`

  `2001:0DB8::CD3/60` address to left of "/" expands to `2001:0DB8:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0CD3`

When writing both a node address and a prefix of that node address (e.g. the node's subnet prefix), the two can be combined as follows:

  the node address `2001:0DB8:0:CD30:123:4567:89AB:CDEF`
  and its subnet number `2001:0DB8:0:CD30::/60`
  can be abbreviated as `2001:0DB8:0:CD30:123:4567:89AB:CDEF/60`

### 2.4. Address Type Identification

The type of an Internet Protocol version 6 address is identified by the high-order bits of the address, as follows:

| Address Type       | Binary Prefix     | Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> notation |
| ------------------ | ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| Unspecified        | 00...0 (128 bits) | ::/128                                               |
| Loopback           | 00...1 (128 bits) | ::1/128                                              |
| Multicast          | 11111111          | FF00::/8                                             |
| Link-Local unicast | 1111111010        | FE80::/10                                            |
| Global Unicast     | (everything else) | -                                                    |

Anycast addresses are taken from the unicast address spaces (of any scope) and are not syntactically distinguishable from unicast addresses.

The general format of Global Unicast addresses is described in Section 2.5.4. Some special purpose subtypes of Global Unicast addresses that contain embedded Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> addresses (For the purposes of Internet Protocol version 4 <sup>IPv4</sup> - Internet Protocol version 6 <sup>IPv6</sup> interoperation) are described in Section 2.5.5.

Future specifications may redefine one or more sub-ranges of the Global Unicast space for other purposes, but unless and until that happens, implementations must treat all addresses that do not start with any of the above-listed prefixes as Global Unicast addresses.

### 2.5. Unicast Addresses

