### 3.4. Sequence Numbers

A fundamental notion in the design is that every octet of data sent over a Transmission Control Protocol <sup>TCP</sup> connection has a sequence number. Since every octet is sequenced, each of them can be acknowledged. The acknowledgment mechanism employed is cumulative so that an acknowledgment of sequence number x indicates that all octets up to but not including x have been received. This mechanism allows for straightforward duplicate detection in the presence of retransmission. The numbering scheme of octets within a segment is as follows: the first data octet immediately following the header is the lowest numbered, and the following octets are numbered consecutively.

<!-- TODO: SLIDE -->

It is essential to remember that the actual sequence number space is finite, though large. This space ranges from 0 to 2<sup>32</sup> - 1. Since the space is finite, all arithmetic dealing with sequence numbers must be performed modulo 2<sup>32</sup>. This unsigned arithmetic preserves the relationship of sequence numbers as they cycle from 2<sup>32</sup> - 1 to 0 again. There are some subtleties to computer modulo arithmetic, so great care should be taken in programming the comparison of such values. The symbol "=<" means "less than or equal" (modulo 2<sup>32</sup>).

<!-- TODO: SLIDE -->

The typical kinds of sequence number comparisons that the Transmission Control Protocol <sup>TCP</sup> implementation must perform include:

1. Determining that an acknowledgment refers to some sequence number sent but not yet acknowledged.
2. Determining that all sequence numbers occupied by a segment have been acknowledged (e.g., to remove the segment from a retransmission queue).
3. Determining that an incoming segment contains sequence numbers that are expected (i.e., that the segment "overlaps" the receive window).

<!-- TODO: SLIDE -->

In response to sending data, the TCP endpoint will receive acknowledgments. The following comparisons are needed to process the acknowledgments:

- Send Unacknowledged <sup>SND.UNA</sup>: Oldest unacknowledged sequence number
- Send Next <sup>SND.NXT</sup>: Next sequence number to be sent
- Segment Acknowledgment Number <sup>SEG.ACK</sup>: Acknowledgment from the receiving Transmission Control Protocol <sup>TCP</sup> peer (next sequence number expected by the receiving Transmission Control Protocol <sup>TCP</sup> peer)
- Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup>: First sequence number of a segment
- Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup>: The number of octets occupied by the data in the segment (counting Synchronize Sequence Number <sup>SYN</sup> AND Finish (No more data from sender) <sup>FIN</sup>)
- Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> + Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup> - 1: Last sequence number of a segment

A new acknowledgment (called at "acceptable ack") is one for which the inequality below holds:

Send Unacknowledged <sup>SND.UNA</sup> < Segment Acknowledgment Number <sup>SEG.ACK</sup> =< Send Next <sup>SND.NXT</sup>

A segment on the retransmission queue is fully acknowledged if the sum of its sequence number and length is less than or equal to the acknowledgment value in the incoming segment.

When data is received, the following comparisons are needed:

- Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup>: Next sequence number expected on an incoming segment, and is the left or lower edge of the receive window
- Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup> - 1: Last sequence number expected on an incoming segment, and is the right or upper edge of the receive window
- Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup>: First sequence number occupied by the incoming segment
- Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> + Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup> - 1: Last sequence number occupied by the incoming segment

A segment is judged to occupy a portion of valid receive sequence space if

Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup> =< Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> < Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup>

or

Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> =< Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> + Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup> - 1 < Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup>

The first part of this test checks to see if the beginning of the segment falls in the window, the second part of the test checks to see if the end of the segment falls in the window; if the segment passes either part of the test, it contains data in the window.

Actuall, it is a little more complicated than this. Due to zero windows are zero length segments, we have four cases for the acceptability of an incoming segment:

| Segment Length | Receive Window | Test |
| -------------- | -------------- | ---- |
| 0              | 0              | Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> = Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> |
| 0              | >0             | Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> =< Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> < Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup> |
| >0             | 0              | Not acceptable |
| >0             | >0             | Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> =< Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> < Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup><br />Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> =< Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> + Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup> - 1 < Receive Next <sup>RCV.NXT</sup> + Receive Window <sup>RCV.WND</sup> |

Table 5: Segment Acceptability Tests

Note that when the receive window is zero no segments should be acceptable except ACK segments. Thus, it is possible for a TCP implementation to maintain a zero receive window while transmitting data and receiving ACK. A TCP receiver must process the RST and URG field of all incoming segments, even when the receive window is zero.

We have taken advantage of the numbering scheme to protect certain control information as well. This is achieved by implicitly including some control flags in the sequence space so they can be retransmitted and acknowledged without confusion (i.e., one and only copy of the control will be acted upon). Control information is not physically carried in the segment data space. Consequently, we must adopt rules for implicitly assigning sequence numbers to control. The SYN and FIN are the only controls requiring this protection, and these controls are used only at connection opening and closing. For sequence number purposes, the SYN is considered to occur before the first actual data octet of the segment in which it occurs, while the FIN is considered to occur after the last actual data octet in a segment in which it occurs. The Segment Length <sup>SEG.LEN</sup> includes both data and sequence space occupying controls. When a SYN is present, then Segment Sequence Number <sup>SEG.SEQ</sup> is the sequence number of the SYN.

#### 3.4.1. Initial Sequence Number Selection

A connection is defined by a pair of sockets. Connections can be reused. New instances of a connection will be referred to as incarnations of the connection. The problem that arises from this is -- "how does the TCP implmentation identify duplicate segments from previous incarnations of the connection?" This problem becomes apparent if the connection is being opened and closed in quick succession, or if the connection breaks with loss of memory and is then reestablished. To support this, the TIME-WAIT state limits the rate for connection reuse, while the initial sequence number selection described below further protects against ambiguity about which incarnation of a connection an incoming packet corresponds to.

To avoid confusion, we must prevent segments from one incarnation of a connection from being used while the same sequence numbers may still be present in the network from an earlier incarnation. We want to assure this even if a TCP endpoint loses all knowledge of the sequence numbers it has been using. When new connections are created, an Initial Sequence Number <sup>ISN</sup> generator is employed that selects a new 32 bit Initial Sequence Number <sup>ISN</sup>. There are security issues that result if an off path attacker is able to predict or guess Initial Sequence Number <sup>ISN</sup> values.

Transmission Control Protocol <sup>TCP</sup> initial sequence numbers are generated from a number sequence that monotonically increases until it wraps, known loosely as a "clock". This clock is a 32 bit counter that typically increments at least once every roughly 4 microseconds, although it is neither assumed to be realtime nor precise, and need not persist across reboots. The clock component is intended to ensure that with a Maximum Segment Lifetime <sup>MSL</sup>, generated Initial Sequence Number <sup>ISN</sup> will be unique than the Maximum Segment Lifetime <sup>MSL</sup>. Please note that for modern networks that support high data rates where the connection might start and quickly advance sequence numbers to overlap within the Maximum Segment Lifetime <sup>MSL</sup>, it is recommended to implement the Timestamp Option as mentioned later in [Section 3.4.3](#343-The-TCP-Quite-Time-Concept).

A TCP implementation must use the above type of "clock" for clock driven selection of initial sequence numbers, and should generate its initial sequence numbers with the expression:

ISN = M + F(Local IP, Local Port, Remote IP, Remote Port, Secret Key)

where M is the 4 microsecond timer, and F() is a pseudorandom function <sup>PRF</sup> of the connection's identifying parameters ("Local IP, Local Port, Remote IP, Remote Port") and a secret key ("Secret Key") attacker could still guess at sequence numbers from the Initial Sequence Number <sup>ISN</sup> used for cryptographic hash of the concatenation of the TCP connection parameters and some secret data. For discussion of the selection of a specific hash algorithm and management of the secret key data, please see [Section 3. roposed Initial Sequence Number Generation Algorithm / Defending against Sequence Number Attacks]()

### 3.4.3. The TCP Quiet Time Concept